Welcome back to the course.
And today we're talking about the chi square test.
This is a statistical test that allows to back everything we've been doing so far in Tablo.
So all those A B tests and classification or categorization tests that we've been doing they've been
very intuitive and we've always said that sample size matters but we're not checking it per se and it's
not a proper statistical test but it's very visual at the same time and fast.
So it's kind of a tradeoff.
It's been a trade off so far but today we will actually talk about the case squared test in detail and
that will allow us to be more confident about the things we're doing and Tablo those intuitive things
and especially when we're explaining them to somebody.
We'll be confident that we are saying the right thing and that this is in fact the outcome and these
are the insights.
So let's get straight into it.
This is the plan for today.
First of all we're going to identify the problem we're going to look at an example from our previous
Tablo manipulations then we will talk about what is a quite chi squared test and how it can help us
solve that problem.
Then we'll look at another example example to then we will actually run chi squared tests in Excel so
I will show you how to build a chi square test in Excel and moreover you will get my template.
You'll be able to download it so you can follow along and create the same thing or you can just download
my template and for along that way.
And also we will verify the chi squared results using an online tool so I'll show you a couple of online
tools we can verify the results which are very it's a quick way to get the outcome of your case squared
test.
And finally we will talk about the chi squared rules and also haven't put in here but I will give you
a challenge to take away a home for you to practice a cascade test.
OK.
Let's get straight into it.
This might be quite a long tutorial so although it is quite an important one if you want to be 100 percent
certain that you're talking about the right thing.
All right so we had a look at agender in our course so far and there was a split between female and
male and we saw that 25 percent of females were exited the bank in the period of observation from that
sample of 10000 people and only 16 percent of males left the bank right.
So the question here is and this is where we identify the challenge of the problem.
The question is is that a statistically significant result.
Can we say for certain that females are more likely or female customers are more likely to leave the
bank than male customers or has or did this happen just by accident.
Does this observation randomly happen.
And that difference between 25 and 16 even though we can see it in our sample size in reality in the
population is not going to be as visible.
And in in the whole population of the bank there is no difference whether it's a female customer or
a male customer they have the same likelihood of living.
So that's when we need to run a chi squared test the because curve test will tell us if this is a random
coincidence or this is in fact a statistically significant result that can be applied or extrapolated
onto the whole population of the bank.
So in order to run us chi squared test this is an important part that you have to remember that you
cannot use percentages you have to change percentages to the absolute figures so we're going to go back
to our absolutes and this is what it looked like in absolutes as you can see there's less female customers
than male customers.
And the exited valid numbers are presented there.
So now let's put this information into a table.
This is what will look like.
This is the observed table this is what we saw.
The number of male and female customers that stay the next it's so you've got the categories as Rose
and you've got the outcomes as columns.
That is the conventional way of presenting a chi squared test a table for a chi squared test.
Now there is in this case squared test there's a second table that you need to create and that table
is called the expected table.
I'm going to use my mouse here because it's pretty important.
So you've got a total of Melkus which you take these two you add them up and gives you a total number
of male customers.
Right.
And that will be about just over 5000 customers.
Now if you take these two the total number of exited and you add them up.
Ill give you about 2000 and we know that there's a total in this whole table the total is 10000.
So 2000 divided by 10000 gives you 20 percent 20 percent of people exit.
Right.
So now this expected table what it represents is if there is no dependency so if leaving the company
the decision to leave the company is independent of gender then what we would expect is that 20 percent
of males leave and 20 percent of females do make sense right.
So if you know that 20 percent of people overall leave the company from from the sample size then it
should be the same for males and females should be 20 percent here and should be 20 percent here.
And that's exactly how you create this table so you calculate 20 percent of the total males you add
up the males you get the 20 percent and then whatever's left.
And those are the ones that stayed and whatever went to females same thing you add up then you get 20
percent of that and whatever's left those customers decided to stay and that's what we expect to see
.
This is what we saw in reality.
And if you look at these two tables they are quite different so the expected value here is over a thousand
here is below 900.
Here is the opposite is below.
It's just just above 900 here over 1100.
And so what the chi squared test will do for you it will tell you is the difference between this table
and this table a random difference or is it a statistically significant difference.
So by default we say that the difference is not statistically significant.
It's just a random coincidence so pretty much we're saying that this table is just like this table plus
minus some little random error which we can discard what the chi square test allows you to do is it
allows you to re reboot rebut or disqualify that hypothesis and say that actually this is a statistically
significant result.
So that means that chi squared is a test designed to test the probability of independence.
So we're testing whether our variable that we're looking at so exited is yes or no is it independent
of gender.
That's what we're testing we're testing the probability of independence and that's important to remember
.
Now let's look at a second example.
Before we continue on to excel here we've got has credit cards and other tests that we ran in Tablo
.
And here you can see that there does it doesn't look like there's any difference right.
It doesn't look like it does.
It makes a difference whether or not you have a credit card not you pretty much like 20 percent of those
who had a credit card exited and 21 percent of those who didn't have a credit card exited.
OK.
So from Tablo we can kind of see that intuitively.
Now if you move to the chi square test you've got we have to get rid of the percentages we have to go
back to salute values which is important.
We have to create the observed table which looks like that.
So we just put in these numbers in there.
We have to create the expected table which we know how to create now.
So we take a total number of people who have credit cards and multiplied by 20 percent.
That will give us this value and then we whatever's left is the people that stayed.
So the people that we would expect to stay and the same thing for people who don't have credit cards
.
This is 20 percent of the total that we have here and that's everybody else.
So what I wanted to highlight here before from now from here we're going to move to excel but before
we do I wanted to highlight too that in Excel we're going to get some results and it's probably going
to be not statistically significant.
So meaning that there is no difference whether you have a credit card or not.
But from here what you can see is that in this chart.
Right.
And in these tables overall if we're preparing for the squared test.
It's all very complicated to see this.
It doesn't doesn't scream at you doesn't tell you like hey this is not a statistically significant result
.
But when you look at the Tablo result here you can see that it is pretty obvious that there is no statistical
significance like you without going into too much detail you can say that I'm quite like I'm not 100
percent certain of the result but I can see that most likely there isn't any statistical significance
here and it's just a random kind of coincidence that these are a bit higher than these.
And that is the beauty of this approach this framework that I'm showing you on top of that you can do
that so quickly you don't have to run the full test every single time just to visualize these things
anyway.
So let's move on to excel.
I'm going to end this show this show and I'm going to bring up Excel and I'll show you how to create
the test.
So here I'm going to zoom in a little bit and then I'm going to say chi squared test and let's create
our table so the first table is the observed table.
Whoops.
Observed table right.
So I'm going to just copy the data.
This is going to be for our one second.
So this is going to be this.
I'm going to copy for gender.
There we go.
And now what I'm going to do is I'm going to add up the records right.
So maybe let's take observed and put it there.
I'm going to add up the records I'm going to say alt's plus plus gives you the sum all plus plus all
plus plus plus plus right and then just do not add plus plus.
So now we know there's 10000 records in here in total.
There's five thousand four hundred males females and that's the people who stayed the people who exited
right.
So we've created the observed table now let's create the expected expect the table right so it's going
to be similar.
We need male female state exited.
But this is going to be a calculation.
So it's very simple to create an excel go equals and you look at the people who stayed right and you
devised by the people overall.
And then you multiply so that's a percentage of people who stayed and you multiply that by the number
of males that you have in total equals.
So here what do we want to do.
We want to do the same for the rest of them.
But in order to speed things up we're just going to lock some of these cells by clicking a for we don't
want this one to move ever then with this one.
We don't want it to move.
We don't want the number to change.
We'll look at the number.
And with this one we don't want the column to change.
We always wanted to be in column D.
So we look at the letter click OK.
And now if I copy it here as you can see it's already done everything for me.
It's looking at the percentage of people who it.
So this column divided by this column or the cell divide by this cell multiplied by a total number of
males.
So there you go.
Eleven one hundred eleven thousand in out in our expected table we had a bit of a different value but
that's because of rounding errors because we took a 20 percent by default.
Here it's a bit different to 20 percent inreality.
So let's copy this one here.
Just check.
You see that same doing the same thing.
Percentage of State times total females.
And here same thing.
So we taking exited divide by 10000 and multiply by total females.
There we go.
So one more time.
All plus plus plus plus plus plus plus plus plus plus.
So here you can notice that this value is the same as this value doesn't change because the whole number
of mails doesn't change.
It doesn't matter how you count.
Right.
And number of females doesn't change.
But what does change is the proportion of state takes it and in each one of them.
So here you can see that it's different to that you can say is different to that.
But once again these don't change so the total number of exited didn't change the total number of stay
didn't change.
That's a good quality check for you.
And here you have 10000 people here you have ten thousand people too.
So last thing we need to do is check the P-value.
So P-value will basically tell you if what the chi squared test would result it's giving back to you
.
So we're going to say equals chi test.
And here we want the actual range as you can see actual ranges that Colma expected range which is that
click enter.
And as you can see P-value is very small.
It even had to use a mathematical or scientific term.
So that is a 10 to the power of minus 26 very small P-value what you need to check is significance level
.
Right.
So we're going to say our significance level is 0.05.
What that means without going into too much detail what that means is that this is basically 5 percent
which is saying that what is the probability that the what is a cut off probability that we want to
check that this is a that this is a random result.
So basically we want to say that Micheaux on an example so if P-value is less than zero point zero or
five then we will say not random Otherwise we will say independent.
Right.
In a dependent.
OK so what this is telling us is that I'm sorry.
So what this is telling us is that because the p value is less than your significance level that this
is not a random result that what you're seeing is some sort of correlation that the results state are
exited is actually dependent on your variable which is gender in this case.
If on the other hand the p value was greater than 0.05 then you would be able to say that the result
is random meaning that your variable here is not dependant on age.
So I'm going to save this I'm going to wait one second I'm going to just bring up my Zeshan section
.
I'll just save it here in advance.
Data mining and this will be chi squared.
All right.
So now what I would like to do is take the values for the state and exited in terms of the has credit
cards so will copy these values into our test and see how that goes.
So I'll just copy them here and then I'll just copy.
I'm just going to copy the values before the formats and then I'll get rid of these two.
All right.
So here what you can see is a different result right here you can see what we have to change this.
This is going to be yes no.
Don't forget to change that.
So here we can see that this is our observed and this is what we're expecting.
And the P-value here is 0.4 7 so it's huge it's a it's a massive P-value 47 percent 47 percent.
Once again we're not going to details of P-value we're just using it as as a flag or a trigger for us
I guess.
So then this is what the chi square test spits out.
And since it's greater than the significance level which is Serpens or 5 here you can see that the result
is independent meaning that our variable stayed exited has nothing to do with whether or not they have
a credit card or not.
And once again so we bring up the presentation now once again here from Tablo we could see this right
away we could tell 21 percent 20 percent.
Not a big difference like you can really tell from here or from any of this.
But from here you can totally tell.
And once again you can run the square test just to make sure that you're on the right track.
All right.
So now what I wanted to show you is an online tool how to run the squared test.
There's our online tool.
So let me just move this to credit card and you just this is the Web site.
I like this tool.
Evan Miller dot org slash Abey hyphen testing's slash chi hyphen square dot HD mal.
So you're putting your successes here and say in this case six hundred thirteen of our total trials
.
OK that's a good question.
What are our total trials.
So our total trials here is so 613.
There we go and total trials is 2 9 4 5.
And here you've got sample 2 you've got 1424 and you told trials is five thousand six hundred thirty
one.
No I'm sorry.
This is actually seven or five five.
There you go.
So what does the test tell us.
No significant difference right.
So we put it in our valleys just like here.
Basically what it did it just ran a quick test for us.
No significant difference.
P-value What is the p values point 48.
What did we get.
Zero point forty eight exactly the same P-value and we can do the same for gender Now if we like.
So if we just go back
there we go so male female will do the same thing eight nine eight 0 is going to be five four five seven
.
Here it's 1 1 3 9 4 5 4 3.
So simple 2 is more successful Don't don't look at that.
Which one is more successful in our case it's the opposite because we're looking at exited as a success
.
But what you can see here is that P-value is tiny.
We get a tiny P-value and the result is the same.
It's not random.
So here you can see that it's not random as well.
So that's how you run the case test.
We're running out of time.
I'm going to end this tutorial now and in the next tutorial I will show you some up on the chi squared
and I'll give you an exercise to take home and look for it.
See you next time.
Until then happy analyzing